=pod

=head1 NAME

EVP_KDF-ARGON2 - The Argon2 EVP_KDF implementation

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Support for computing the B<argon2> password-based KDF through the B<EVP_KDF>
API.

The EVP_KDF-ARGON2 algorithm implements the Argon2 password-based key
derivation function, as described in IETF Argon2 draft.  It is memory-hard in
the sense that it deliberately requires a significant amount of RAM for efficient
computation. The intention of this is to render brute forcing of passwords on
systems that lack large amounts of main memory (such as GPUs or ASICs)
computationally infeasible.

=head2 Identity

"ARGON2I", "ARGON2D", and "ARGON2ID" are the names for this implementation; it
can be used with the EVP_KDF_fetch() function.

=head2 Supported parameters

The supported parameters are:

=over 4

=item "pass" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_PASSWORD>) <octet string>

=item "salt" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_SALT>) <octet string>

=item "secret" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_SECRET>) <octet string>

=item "iter" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_ITER>) <unsigned integer>

These parameters work as described in L<EVP_KDF(3)/PARAMETERS>.

=item "t" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_THREADS>) <unsigned integer>

=item "s" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_ARGON2_SZ>) <unsigned integer>

=item "a" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_ARGON2_AD>) <octet string>

=item "l" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_ARGON2_LANES>) <unsigned integer>

=item "m" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_ARGON2_MEMCOST>) <unsigned integer>

=item "f" (B<OSSL_KDF_PARAM_ARGON2_FLAGS>) <unsigned integer>

These parameters configure the Argon2.

m is the memory size argument, l the number of lanes, a is the optional
associated data, s is the digest length, t the number of threads.

You may use f to control whether or not B<OPENSSL_cleanse> is called on
password and/or secret during initial hash phase, by setting applying
1 or 2 mask, respectively.

t, s, l, m, and f are of type B<uint32_t>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<EVP_KDF(3)>,
L<EVP_KDF_new_ctx(3)>,
L<EVP_KDF_free_ctx(3)>,
L<EVP_KDF_set_ctx_params(3)>,
L<EVP_KDF_derive(3)>,
L<EVP_KDF(3)/PARAMETERS>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2020 The OpenSSL Project Authors. All Rights Reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License 2.0 (the "License").  You may not use
this file except in compliance with the License.  You can obtain a copy
in the file LICENSE in the source distribution or at
L<https://www.openssl.org/source/license.html>.

=cut
